Lecture 8: Causal Discovery and Inference (#8)
sailinglab/pgm-spring-2019: _posts/2019-02-11-lecture-08.md

> # Lecture 8 : Causal Discovery and Inference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---
layout: distill
title: "Lecture 8: Causal Discovery and Inference"
description: <insert description here>
date: <insert date here>

lecturers:
  - name: Eric Xing
    url: "https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~epxing/"

authors:
  - name: Allan Wang
    url: "#"  # optional URL to the author's homepage
  - name: Binghao Deng
    url: "#"
  - name: Weizhao Shao
    url: "#"
  - name: Zhuoran Liu

editors:
  - name: Lisa Lee
    url: "http://leelisa.com"

abstract: >
---
```
Please follow the lecture note template. You'll need to update the description, date, and author names in the above suggestion. For an example, see https://raw.githubusercontent.com/sailinglab/pgm-spring-2019/master/_posts/2019-01-23-lecture-03.md

> Causation implies correlation(or dependence) but correlation doesn't imply causation. Consider the case of chocolate consumption in a country compared with the number of nobel laureates in the country

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Causation implies correlation (or dependence), but correlation does not imply causation. Consider the case of chocolate consumption vs. the number of Nobel Laureates in the country:
```

<figure>
  <div class="row">
    <div class="col two">
      <img src="{{ '/assets/img/notes/lecture-08/scribe1.jpg' | relative_url }}"  width="600" height="400" />
    </div>
  </div>
  <figcaption>

>     <strong>Chocolate consumptions vs Nobel Laureate</strong>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <strong>Chocolate Consumption vs. # of Nobel Laureates</strong>
```

  </figcaption>
</figure>

> From this plot, we can see that they are highly correlated. But it is absurd to say that if we want to increase the number of nobel laureates in a country, we need to eat more chocolate. This is where the idea of causality comes in. They are correlated but chocolate consumption is not the cause of nobel laureates. The following equations capture this difference mathematically

Reviewer: Grammar: Please fix "nobel laureate" to "Nobel Laureate" everywhere in this file.

> From this plot, we can see that they are highly correlated. But it is absurd to say that if we want to increase the number of nobel laureates in a country, we need to eat more chocolate. This is where the idea of causality comes in. They are correlated but chocolate consumption is not the cause of nobel laureates. The following equations capture this difference mathematically

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From this plot, we can see that they are highly correlated. But it is absurd to say that if we want to increase the number of Nobel Laureates in a country, we need to eat more chocolate. This is where the idea of causality comes in. They are correlated, but chocolate consumption is not the cause of Nobel Laureates. The following equations capture this difference mathematically:
```

> 

Reviewer: Change lines 17-23 to:
```
* $$X$$ and $$Y$$ are dependent if and only if $$\exists x_1 \neq x_2$$ such that
$$
P(Y | X = x_1) \neq P(Y \mid X = x_2)
$$.

* $$X$$ is a cause of $$Y$$ if and only if $$\exists x_1 \neq x_2$$ such that
$$
P(Y \mid do(X = x_1) \neq P(Y \mid X = x_2)
$$.
```

This seems to fix the LaTeX rendering, and bullet points look nicer:
![screen shot 2019-02-19 at 12 07 10 am](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2617555/52991347-5b59a700-33da-11e9-9911-5208d7c0c1d4.png)

> X and Y are dependent if and only if $$\exists x_1 \neq x_2$$ such that:

Reviewer: Please change "X" to "$$X$$" and "Y" to "$$Y$$" everywhere in the file.

> X and Y are dependent if and only if $$\exists x_1 \neq x_2$$ such that:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. $$X$$ and $$Y$$ are dependent if and only if $$\exists x_1 \neq x_2$$ such that
```

Please change "X" to "$$X$$" and "Y" to "$$Y$$" everywhere in the file.

> $$P(Y|X=x_{1}) \neq P(Y|X=x_2) $$

Reviewer 2: This seems to fix the broken LaTeX rendering:
```suggestion
$$
P(Y | X = x_1) \neq P(Y \mid X = x_2)
$$
```

X is a cause of Y if and only if $$ \exists x_1 \neq x_2$$ such that:

> $$  P(Y|do(X=x_1) \neq P(Y|X=x_2) $$

Reviewer: Define what is "do", and fix unequal parentheses in "P(Y|do(X=x_1)"

> The definition requires just a pair of distinct $$ x_1, x_2 $$ to have different conditional distribution of Y. Y might have same conditional distribution over a range of x values. But if we find even a single pair for which the conditional distribution is different, X and Y are dependent. Same goes for causation 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The definition requires just a pair of distinct $$ x_1, x_2 $$ to have different conditional distributions of $$Y$$. $$Y$$ might have the same conditional distribution over a range of $$X$$ values, but if we find even a single pair for which the conditional distribution is different, $$X$$ and $$Y$$ are dependent. The same goes for causation.
```

The causation definition is circular in the sense that if we don't know the causal relation of the other variables, we can't define the intervention of X and thus can't find the causal relation of X and Y. So to define one causal relation, we need all other causal relations. 

## Causal Thinking
### Simpson's Paradox

> Let's say there are two type of patients, one with small kidney stones and other with large kidney stones. And there are two types of treatments to choose from, A and B. From the data we can see that, if we consider the patients separately, in both the cases treatment A is better due to higher recovery rate. But if we combine both the categories of patients, we see that the treatment B has higher recovery rate. So, as a doctor, what treatment would you suggest to a patient.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Example 1**: Suppose there are two types of patients, one with small kidney stones and the other with large kidney stones. There are two types of treatments to choose from, A and B. From the data we can see that, if we consider the patient categories separately, treatment A has a higher recovery rate in both cases. But if we combine the categories of patients, we see that the treatment B has a higher recovery rate 83% (289/350). So, as a doctor, what treatment would you suggest to a patient?
```

> <figure>

Reviewer: I think the figure looks better in the web browser if the two images are placed side-by-side

Reviewer: Thanks @alshedivat for the fix

  <div class="row">
    <div class="col two">
      <img src="{{ '/assets/img/notes/lecture-08/scribe2.PNG' | relative_url }}" />
    </div>
     <div class="col two">
      <img src="{{ '/assets/img/notes/lecture-08/scribe3.PNG' | relative_url }}" />
    </div>
  </div>
</figure>

> Consider another example as follows. We plot the graph of cholesterol vs exercise of people for different age groups. And for each age group, we see that the more you exercise, the less cholesterol you have. But if we combine all the plots (of different age groups), we see the opposite result. The graph says that the more you exercise, the more cholesterol you have.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Example 2**: We plot cholesterol levels vs. the amount of exercise for people of different age groups. For each age group, we see that the more you exercise, the less cholesterol you have. But if we combine all the plots (of different age groups), we see the opposite result: the more you exercise, the more cholesterol you have.
```

> <figure>

Reviewer: Same here, I think the figure looks better in the web browser if the two images are placed side-by-side

Reviewer: Thanks @alshedivat for the fix

  <div class="row">
    <div class="col two">
      <img src="{{ '/assets/img/notes/lecture-08/scribe4.PNG' | relative_url }}" />
    </div>
    <div class="col two">
      <img src="{{ '/assets/img/notes/lecture-08/scribe5.PNG' | relative_url }}" />
    </div>
  </div>
</figure>

> In both the cases, there was a common cause between the quantities we were comparing, and due to this common cause, the relationship of the quantities can be very arbitrary. So, we can't rely on them for any kind of recommendation. We should fix the value of the common cause, and then see the relation between the two quantities we want.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In both examples, there was a common cause between the quantities we were comparing, and due to this common cause, the relationship between the quantities can be arbitrary. We should fix the value of the common cause, and then see the relation between the quantities we want to compare.
```

### Strange Dependence

> Example - If we go back 50 years, we observe that female college students are smarter than male student on average. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Example**: If we go back 50 years, we observe that female college students have higher IQ than male students on average. 
```

> Gender and IQ are two very different quantities, and we can safely say that they are independent. But given a common cause, like say going to college, now they become dependent. A simple way to understand this is as follows. Consider two independent variable X and Y. But if we are given the sum of X and Y, now they both are dependent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gender and IQ are two very different quantities, and we can safely assume that they are independent. But given a common cause, like say going to college, now they become dependent. A simple way to understand this is as follows: Two independent variables $$X$$ and $$Y$$ become dependent if we condition on the sum of $$X$$ and $$Y$$.
```

The answer is to switch our choice. If we switch, our probabilty of winning becomes 2/3 rather than the 1/3 if we stick to our choice. We can think of it as follows. There are three options to select from initially, two empty doors and one with the prize money. If we are always switching, we will end up with the prize money if we have initially chosen the empty door and we will lose if we have initially selected the door with the prize money. So to win, we need to select the empty door at first whose probability is 2/3. So the chance of us winning the car if we switch is 2/3.

### Causal Models
If we have causal models, it is very easy to do intervention. We just need to delete all the incoming edges into the nodes which we are intervening and then do inference on the obtained graphical structure.

Also if we know the causal structure, we can apply some of the known distributions into new scenarios. This idea is used in transfer learning.

> ### Prediction

Reviewer: I'm very confused by these headers. Should "Prediction", "Intervention", "Counterfactual Thinking" headers be . under "Causal Models"? If so, please change "### Prediction" to "#### Prediction", and so on.

This answers the question of $$ P(Y | X) $$ which means the probability of Y if X happens to take a particular value. This can be found out just from the observational data. We don't need any graphs, or causal realtions to find this value. 

### Intervention
This answers the question of $$ P(Y | do(X)) $$ which means what is the probability of Y if X is set to a particular value keeping all the other variables same. For this, we definitely need to know all the causal relations of all the variables.

### Counterfactual Thinking
This answers the question of $$ P(y_x | x', y') $$, which is the probability that event Y = y would be observed had X been x, given that we actually observed X to be $$ x' $$ and and Y to be $$ y' $$. For this, again we require causal relations via the structural equation model.

## Identification of Causal Relation

### Causal DAGs
Each edge in a causal DAG corresponds to direct causal influence between the nodes and it is asymmetric.

> Let $$ P_x(V) $$ be the distribution resulting from intervention do(X=x). Then a DAG is a causal DAG if

Reviewer: $$do(X=x)$$
Be consistent about using math notation in the text, not just here but everywhere in the file

* $$ P_x(V) $$ is Markov relative to G. This distribution is still factorizable according to the Markov property (product of proabbility of each node given its parents) with respect to G
    
* $$ P_x(V_i = v_i) = 1 $$ for $$ V_i \in X $$ and $$ v_i $$ consistent with X=x. This is so because we have performed intervention on X and we have set that to x. Hence we know those variables with absolute certainty.
    

> * $$ P_x(V_i | PA_i) = P(V_i | PA_i) $$ for all $$ V_i \notin X $$ where $$ PA_i $$ represents the parents of $V_i$. That means the conditional distributions of all the nodes not included in the intervention remains the same before and after the intervention. We can see this graphically since while doing intervention, we just delete all the incoming edges into the nodes on which intervention is performed. So the other nodes remain unchanges(in terms of parents)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* $$ P_x(V_i \mid PA_i) = P(V_i \mid PA_i) $$ for all $$ V_i \notin X $$ where $$ PA_i $$ represents the parents of $V_i$. That means the conditional distributions of all the nodes not included in the intervention remains the same before and after the intervention. We can see this graphically since while doing intervention, we just delete all the incoming edges into the nodes on which intervention is performed. So the other nodes remain unchanges(in terms of parents)
```

Changing "|" to "\mid" in the LaTeX code seems to fix the equation rendering.

### Randomized Control Experiments
We change a controlled variable and observe the change in an outcome variable. All the other variables that influence the outcome variable is either fixed or varied at random. So now any change observed in the outcome variable must have been due to the change in the controlled variable.

Its disadvantage is that its expensive and in many cases impossible to do. The outcome variable can depend on many other variables. So, to find one causal relation, we would need a lot of data and we need to ensure that the other variables are fixed or varied randomly across the experiments which is a very hard task.

### Kidney Stone Experiment

> Lets revisit the kidney stone treatment example. Let R = Recovery, T = Treatment and S = Stone size, then

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's revisit the kidney stone treatment example. Let R = Recovery, T = Treatment and S = Stone size, then
```

> $$ P(R|T) = \sum_S P(R|S,T)P(S|T) $$

Reviewer: This equation doesn't render, please fix.

Changing "|" to "\mid" in the LaTeX code seems to fix the rendering problem elsewhere, so try that here.

> $$ P(R|do(T)) = \sum_S P(R|S,T)P(S) $$

Reviewer: This equation doesn't render, please fix.

Changing "|" to "\mid" in the LaTeX code seems to fix the rendering problem elsewhere, so try that here.

Note that while intervening, we cut off all incoming edges into the treatment node. So, now S and T are independent

> Figures

Reviewer: Did you mean to insert a figure here?

### Causal Effect Identifiability

> An aspect of a statistical model is identifiable, if it cannot be changed without there also being some change in the distribution of the observed variables. So if we can express a quantity as a function of the distributions of observed variables, then we can say that quantity is identifiable. Thus the causal effect is identifiable if and only if we can represent $$ P(Y|do(X)) $$ in terms of the distribution of observed variables. i.e. if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An aspect of a statistical model is identifiable, if it cannot be changed without there also being some change in the distribution of the observed variables. So if we can express a quantity as a function of the distributions of observed variables, then we can say that quantity is identifiable. Thus the causal effect is identifiable if and only if we can represent $$ P(Y|do(X)) $$ in terms of the distribution of observed variables, i.e. if
```

> $$ P_{M1}(Y|do(X)) = P_{M2}(Y|do(X)) $$ for every pair of models M1 and M2 with the dame graph and the same distibution of observed variables(Unobserved / Latent variable distributions can be changed)

Reviewer: This equation doesn't render, please fix.

Changing "|" to "\mid" in the LaTeX code seems to fix the rendering problem elsewhere, so try that here.

> Example - If we have just two random variables X and Y(both observed) where X is the cause of Y and there is no confounder.So, $$ P(Y|do(X)) = P(Y|X) $$ and we know this is identifiable because for changing $$ P(Y|X) $$, we would have to change the distribution of P(X,Y).

Reviewer: This equation doesn't render, please fix.

Changing "|" to "\mid" in the LaTeX code seems to fix the rendering problem elsewhere, so try that here.

> But, now lets say we have a confounder C, which is the common cause of both X and Y. And this is not observed. Now, we can change the distribution of C such that P(X,Y) is unchanged but we get different $$ P(Y|do(X)) $$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But now let's say we have a confounder C, which is the common cause of both $$X$$ and $$Y$$, and is not observed. Then we can change the distribution of $$C$$ such that $$P(X,Y)$$ is unchanged but we get different $$ P(Y|do(X)) $$.
```

> $$ P(Y|do(X)) $$ can also be written as $$ P(y | \hat{x}) $$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$$ P(Y|do(X)) $$ can also be written as $$ P(y | \hat{x}) $$.
```

> #### Back Door Criterion 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Back-Door Criterion 
```

> A set of variables Z satisfies the back-door criterion relative to an ordered pair of variables $$ (X_i, X_j) $$ if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A set of variables Z satisfies the **back-door criterion** relative to an ordered pair of variables $$ (X_i, X_j) $$ if
```
For definitions, please **bold** the thing being defined, here and elsewhere in the file.

* No node in Z is a descendant of $$ X_i $$

> * Z blocks every path between $$ X_i $$ and $$ X_j $$ that contains an arrow into $X_i$ (Hence the name back-door)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Z blocks every path between $$ X_i $$ and $$ X_j $$ that contains an arrow into $$X_i$$ (hence the name back-door).
```

If the set of nodes Z follows these two conditions then $$ \[P (y | \hat{x}) = \sum_z P(y|x,z)P(z) \] $$

> Same as we saw earlier in the case of kidney stone treatment. And thus $P(y|\hat{x})$ is now identifiable because of this back-door adjustment.\\

Reviewer: Please fix LaTeX equations that have single (rather than double) dollar signs, they do not render correctly in markdown.

> Proof : left

Reviewer: Did you mean to add a proof here?

> #### Front Door Criterion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Front-Door Criterion
```

A set of variables Z satisfies the front-door criterion relative to an ordered pair of variables $$ (X_i, X_j) $$ if
* Z intercept all directed paths from X to Y (hence the name front-door)

> * Z There is no back-door path from X to Z 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* There is no back-door path from X to Z 
```

* All back-door paths from Z to Y are blocked by X

> If the set of nodes Z follows these two conditions then $$ \[P (y | \hat{x}) = \sum_z P(z|x)\sum_{x'}P(y|x',z)P(x') \] $$

Reviewer: This equation doesn't render, please fix.

Changing "|" to "\mid" in the LaTeX code seems to fix the rendering problem elsewhere, so try that here.

Also, try
$$
\begin{equation}
x
\end{begin{equation}
$$
instead of $$\\[ x \\]$$.

> Proof: left

Reviewer: Did you mean to add a proof here?

#### Propensity Score

The Average Causal Effect (ACE), defined as: 

> $$ \mathbb{E} \left[ Y \ | \ do(x) \right] - 

Reviewer: This equation doesn't render, please fix.

Changing "|" to "\mid" in the LaTeX code seems to fix the rendering problem elsewhere, so try that here.

\mathbb{E} \left[ Y \ | \ do(x') \right] $$

> Given that $$ P(Y \ | \ do(x)) = \sum_{c} P(Y \ | \ x,c)P(c) $$ might not share the same $$ P(c) $$, one solution for an estimator of the ACE can be through direct matching. If $$ C $$ is a high dimensional space one can use the propensity score to achieve unconfoundedness and estimate ACE.

Reviewer: This equation doesn't render, please fix.

Changing "|" to "\mid" in the LaTeX code seems to fix the rendering problem elsewhere, so try that here.

### Causal Discovery

Causal discovery relies on two assumptions:

> The Causal Markov condition: that each variable is independent of its non-descendants given its parents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Causal Markov condition**: Each variable is independent of its non-descendants given its parents.
```

> Faithfulness condition: all observed (conditional) independencies are captured in the causal graph. Roughly speaking, faithfulness allow you to go back from independence to causal graph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Faithfulness condition**: All observed (conditional) independencies are captured in the causal graph. Roughly speaking, faithfulness allows you to go back from independence to causal graph.
```

The above two conditions allows us to determine a list of candidate causal structures, with the same causal skeleton. Following this, we need to determine the causal direction. This step involves finding v-structure and doing orientation propagation. 

The following example as given in lecture for reasoning about independence conditions:

Suppose you have four variables $$ X_1, X_2, X_3, X_4 $$ such that:

> \[X_1 \perp X_2\]

Reviewer: This equation doesn't render, please fix.

> $$ X_1 \perp X_4 | X_3 $$

Reviewer: This equation doesn't render, please fix.

Changing "|" to "\mid" in the LaTeX code seems to fix the rendering problem elsewhere, so try that here.

> $$ X_2 \perp X_4 | X_3 $$

Reviewer: This equation doesn't render, please fix.

Changing "|" to "\mid" in the LaTeX code seems to fix the rendering problem elsewhere, so try that here.

> The question is: can there exist a confounder behind $X_3$ and $X_4$?

Reviewer: Fix single to double dollar signs

> The answer is no. As if there is a confounder C which is the parent of both $$ X_3 $$ and $$ X_4 $$, then the path between $$ X_1, X_3, C, X_4 $$  is open, thus $$ X_1 \not\perp X_4 | X_3  $$.

Reviewer: This equation doesn't render, please fix.

Changing "|" to "\mid" in the LaTeX code seems to fix the rendering problem elsewhere, so try that here.

---
layout: distill
title: "Lecture 8: Causal Discovery and Inference"
description: <insert description here>

> date: <insert date here>

Reviewer: Insert description and date here. See https://raw.githubusercontent.com/sailinglab/pgm-spring-2019/master/_posts/2019-02-13-lecture-09.md for an example.

Reviewer: Thanks @alshedivat for the fix

    url: "#"  # optional URL to the author's homepage
  - name: Aniruddh Shetty
    url: "#"
  - name: Tom Yan
    url: "#"
  - name: Kin Gutierrez Olivares

editors:
  - name: Lisa Lee
    url: "http://leelisa.com"

abstract: >
---
Causation implies correlation (or dependence), but correlation does not imply causation. Consider the case of chocolate consumption vs. the number of Nobel Laureates in the country:

<figure>
  <div class="row">
    <div class="col two">
      <img src="{{ '/assets/img/notes/lecture-08/scribe1.jpg' | relative_url }}"  width="600" height="400" />
    </div>
  </div>
  <figcaption>
    <strong>Chocolate Consumption vs. # of Nobel Laureates</strong>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

From this plot, we can see that they are highly correlated. But it is absurd to say that if we want to increase the number of Nobel Laureates in a country, we need to eat more chocolate. This is where the idea of causality comes in. They are correlated, but chocolate consumption is not the cause of Nobel Laureates. The following equations capture this difference mathematically:

$$X$$ and $$Y$$ are dependent if and only if $$ \exists x_1 $$ different than $$ x_2 $$ such that:

$$

> P(Y \mid X=x_{1}) \text{ different than } P(Y \mid X=x_2)

Reviewer: These equations still do not render when I run jekyll locally:

![screen shot 2019-02-28 at 12 02 00 am](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2617555/53542350-19241a00-3aec-11e9-8ab8-1edc5d564390.png)

Please make sure that all equations render properly. If my local instance is wrong and the equations render properly on your computer, let me know.

Reviewer: @alshedivat pushed a fix and the equations render now. Thanks Maruan!

$$

$$X$$ is a cause of $$Y$$ if and only if $$ \exists x_1 $$ different than $$ x_2 $$ such that:

$$
P(Y \mid do(X=x_1) \text{ different than } P(Y \mid X=x_2) 
$$

> The definition requires just a pair of distinct $$ x_1, x_2 $$ to have different conditional distribution of Y. Y might have same conditional distribution over a range of x values. But if we find even a single pair for which the conditional distribution is different, X and Y are dependent. Same goes for causation 

Reviewer: As requested in the previous review, please change
- "X" to "$$X$$"
- "Y" to "$$Y$$"
everywhere in the file.

> The definition requires just a pair of distinct $$ x_1, x_2 $$ to have different conditional distribution of Y. Y might have same conditional distribution over a range of x values. But if we find even a single pair for which the conditional distribution is different, X and Y are dependent. Same goes for causation 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The definition requires just a pair of distinct $$ x_1, x_2 $$ to have different conditional distribution of Y. Y might have same conditional distribution over a range of x values. But if we find even a single pair for which the conditional distribution is different, X and Y are dependent. Same goes for causation.
```

    
* $$ P_x(V_i = v_i) = 1 $$ for $$ V_i \in X $$ and $$ v_i $$ consistent with X=x. This is so because we have performed intervention on X and we have set that to x. Hence we know those variables with absolute certainty.
    
* $$ P_x(V_i \mid PA_i) = P(V_i \mid PA_i) $$ for all $$ V_i \notin X $$ where $$ PA_i $$ represents the parents of $$ V_i $$. That means the conditional distributions of all the nodes not included in the intervention remains the same before and after the intervention. We can see this graphically since while doing intervention, we just delete all the incoming edges into the nodes on which intervention is performed. So the other nodes remain unchanges(in terms of parents)

### Randomized Control Experiments
We change a controlled variable and observe the change in an outcome variable. All the other variables that influence the outcome variable is either fixed or varied at random. So now any change observed in the outcome variable must have been due to the change in the controlled variable.

> Its disadvantage is that its expensive and in many cases impossible to do. The outcome variable can depend on many other variables. So, to find one causal relation, we would need a lot of data and we need to ensure that the other variables are fixed or varied randomly across the experiments which is a very hard task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its disadvantage is that it is expensive and in many cases impossible to do. The outcome variable can depend on many other variables. So, to find one causal relation, we would need a lot of data and we need to ensure that the other variables are fixed or varied randomly across the experiments, which is a very hard task.
```

$$ P(Y \mid do(X)) $$ can also be written as $$ P(y \mid \hat{x}) $$

#### Back-Door Criterion 
A set of variables Z satisfies the **back-door criterion** relative to an ordered pair of variables $$ (X_i, X_j) $$ if

* No node in Z is a descendant of $$ X_i $$
* Z blocks every path between $$ X_i $$ and $$ X_j $$ that contains an arrow into $$X_i$$ (Hence the name back-door)

If the set of nodes Z follows these two conditions then $$ P (y \mid \hat{x}) = \sum_z P(y \mid x,z)P(z) $$
Same as we saw earlier in the case of kidney stone treatment. And thus $$ P(y \mid \hat{x}) $$ is now identifiable because of this back-door adjustment.

#### Front-Door Criterion
A set of variables Z satisfies the front-door criterion relative to an ordered pair of variables $$ (X_i, X_j) $$ if
* Z intercept all directed paths from X to Y (hence the name front-door)
* There is no back-door path from X to Z 
* All back-door paths from Z to Y are blocked by X
If the set of nodes Z follows these two conditions then

$$
P(y \mid \hat{x}) = \sum_z P(z \mid x)\sum_{x'}P(y \mid x',z)P(x')
$$

####  Unification

> A sufficient condition under which the causal effect $$ P(y | do(x)) $$ is identifiable is that there exist no bi-directed path between X and any of its children. For more information, this is presented in the paper "A General Identification Condition for Causal Effect".

Reviewer: This line doesn't seem to render properly:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2617555/53582678-eca0ea00-3b4d-11e9-8ee7-857ac4247320.png)

The Average Causal Effect (ACE), defined as: 
$$ 
\mathbb{E} \left[ Y \mid do(x) \right] - \mathbb{E} \left[ Y \mid do(x') \right] 
$$

Given that $$ P(Y \mid do(x)) = \sum_{c} P(Y \mid x,c)P(c) $$ might not share the same $$ P(c) $$, one solution for an estimator of the ACE can be through direct matching. If $$ C $$ is a high dimensional space one can use the propensity score to achieve unconfoundedness and estimate ACE.
### Causal Discovery

Causal discovery relies on two assumptions:
* **Causal Markov condition**: Each variable is independent of its non-descendants given its parents.

* **Faithfulness condition**: All observed (conditional) independencies are captured in the causal graph. Roughly speaking, faithfulness allows you to go back from independence to causal graph.

The above two conditions allows us to determine a list of candidate causal structures, with the same causal skeleton. Following this, we need to determine the causal direction. This step involves finding v-structure and doing orientation propagation. 

The following example as given in lecture for reasoning about independence conditions:

Suppose you have four variables $$ X_1, X_2, X_3, X_4 $$ such that:

> $$

Reviewer: ```suggestion

$$
```
Add a newline so the equation is centered. Right now it renders like this:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2617555/53582760-1ce88880-3b4e-11e9-99b1-164d08443cd1.png)
